Thank you all. It is good to have you back in Pierre. Before I begin today, I’d like to note a
historical milestone. Today is the beginning of Lt. Governor Matt Michels’ seventh regular
session as President of the Senate, and prior to that, he presided for four sessions as Speaker of
the House. Those 11 sessions make Matt Michels the longest-serving presiding officer in the
history of the South Dakota State Legislature. Let’s recognize and thank him for that service.
Over the past six years, we have undertaken many significant initiatives together and have
made progress in many areas. Today I am going to provide updates on many of our efforts, in
the areas of education, transportation, criminal justice, workforce, and tribal affairs, among
others. I want to update you on our accomplishments and, also in some cases, talk about
adjustments that we can make to continue to improve.
STATE REVENUES
First, a brief update on our state revenue situation. I have some good news, and I have some
bad news.
I’ll start with the bad news. Since we met in December, revenue has not strengthened. Sales
tax continues to run below even revised projections. Overall revenue is down another
$5.8 million. We will need to continue to watch revenues over the next two months to ensure
we adopt a structurally balanced budget in March.
We all know that the farm economy is one reason for weakness in the sales tax, and another
reason is the continued growth in online sales. Many online retailers do not collect and remit
sales tax. As you know, the state has taken several steps over the years to try to collect more of
that tax. After last session, the Department of Revenue reached out to many online retailers to
encourage them to remit tax.
And that’s the good news. Today, I am pleased to announce that the state has reached an
agreement with Amazon to collect and remit state and local sales taxes in South Dakota.
Amazon will begin voluntarily to collect sales taxes on February 1 and will remit beginning in
late March. 
2
Amazon, as you know, is a leading online merchant, growing every year by double digits. Their
decision to collect sales tax doesn’t solve the sales tax issue for online purchases, but it’s a big
step in the right direction. Eileen Sullivan is here today representing Amazon. For their
decision as a good corporate citizen to join the many South Dakota retailers who collect and
remit the sales tax, I’d ask her to stand so that we can thank her.
BETTER GOVERNMENT INITIATIVE
In past years, I’ve talked about a “Better Government Initiative” – a constant effort to make
state government more efficient, more open, and accessible. We’ve made good strides over
the past six years, and I’ll be asking you to help us further improve this year.
First, we continue to work on “red tape repeal” efforts. Over the past six years, we have
proposed and you have passed a repeal of over 4,000 sections of obsolete or unnecessary laws
and rules, accounting for nearly 470,000 words. We will be proposing more of these bills this
year.
Another important component of Better Government is to be more open, accountable, and
accessible. I have made this a priority, and we have made considerable progress. We recently
launched an online pardon application site – making South Dakota the first state in the nation
with a completely online pardon application process. This year, I will also be supporting the
attorney general’s proposal to make booking photographs, also known as mugshots, open to
the public, as in most states.
Last year, I asked Lt. Governor Michels to lead an effort to improve our state’s internal controls.
You passed legislation creating the Board of Internal Controls, and that body has been meeting
monthly since May. Internal controls within state government itself are already strong. In fact,
we just completed our Comprehensive Annual Financial Report for FY16 – the earliest
completion in 20 years – with an “unqualified” clean audit from the Department of Legislative
Audit. But we must do a better job of monitoring federal funds that pass through the state to
non-state entities. This is a complex area, but the board is working hard to establish these
standards.
One important aspect of internal controls is avoiding conflicts of interest. Most conflicts of
interest are innocent and can be avoided through education. Two years ago, you passed, and I
signed legislation creating new conflict of interest standards for state employees, and that
system is working well. We now have a system that makes state employees more aware of
potential conflicts, so they can be prevented or publicly disclosed and identified as not against
public interest.
Last year, I signed similar legislation for state board and commission members and for local
school board members. After one year’s experience, I will support legislation this year to clarify
and streamline that law so that boards can achieve our objective of bringing transparency to
these situations. 
3
Over the past six years, we have taken many steps to make state government information more
accessible. We have put economic development grants online. We have put restaurant
inspections online. Information on oil, gas, and water drilling is now online. Open.SD.gov has
been completely redesigned and is a central hub for information including grants and contracts,
payroll information, and checkbook-level detail on vender payments.
The State Legislature itself has been a leader in this area. It was twenty years ago that the
legislature launched its excellent website that allows for online tracking of legislation and live
and archived internet streaming of all legislative meetings.
In the Executive Branch, Rules.SD.gov allows citizens to track and comment upon proposed
rules. Two years ago, we also launched a portal to centralize information on state boards and
commissions in one place – membership information, agendas, meeting materials, minutes,
financial reports, and audits.
This year, I will ask you to support legislation to institutionalize the Boards and Commissions
portal. Today, I can require state agencies to utilize this site, but I want the law to require it
after I’m gone. This site only works if boards are required to post their information online, just
as we require them in law to post their public notices at the location where a meeting is held.
We are also making state board and commission meetings accessible with internet streaming.
South Dakota Public Broadcasting recently launched SD.net which is a one-stop website to
stream legislative proceedings and board and commission meetings, as well as other Public
Broadcasting coverage such as high school state tournaments.
All of these efforts have paid off. In 2011, shortly after I took office, South Dakota received a
D+ for online access to government financial data from the Public Interest Research Group. As
of the 2016 report, South Dakota has improved that score to an A-.
One reliable advocate for openness over the years has been news reporter Bob Mercer. Of
course, as a reporter, Bob has written about the need for openness. But when he has seen
opportunities to improve, he’s also shared them with my office, and I always appreciated that.
Several of these improvements were Bob’s suggestions, including the Rules website, the
expansion of the Boards and Commissions portal, and even the case outside the Capitol
Building for posting notices. Bob is confronting some health challenges, as you may know, and
he will not be here this year to cover the legislative session. But I hope we all will keep Bob and
his family in our thoughts, as we continue these efforts toward openness.
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Since I spoke to you last year at this time, I’m very proud that South Dakota has now obtained
AAA ratings – the highest possible – from all three major credit rating agencies. One reason for
our AAA rating is the breadth of financial information that we compile and make available
online. Transparency is important in its own right, but it also has a positive financial impact.
4
The AAA rating saves money when our tech schools, universities, and hospitals issue bonds –
we get a lower interest rate because of our bond rating. Two years ago, at the behest of the
lieutenant governor, you passed legislation that also allows school districts to benefit. Districts
borrowing through the Health and Ed Authority can now leverage our credit rating. Since this
began, at least eight school districts have realized savings. Redfield saved $185,000. Meade
County saved $150,000. The Oglala Lakota School District was able to refinance a 2013 debt
and saved $3 million.
Our AAA rating is the consequence of the many sound financial decisions that governors and
legislators have made over the years. We have balanced our budget for 128 years and recently
placed an explicit requirement for a balanced budget in the constitution. We’ve made it the
norm to have a structurally balanced budget, which supports ongoing expenses with ongoing
revenues only.
We have built and maintained a rainy-day fund that is ten percent of our general fund budget.
We have been conservative in estimating revenues and expenses, and when we have one-time
money to spend, we have prudently used it to repay debt early, secure an existing asset, endow
an ongoing asset, or create a new asset.
And we can all be very proud of the management of the South Dakota Retirement System. The
plan is well funded and routinely rates as one of the strongest in the nation. That is no
accident. Over the past few years, the retirement system trustees have proposed, and you
have passed, several important adjustments to the plan that have strengthened it for the longterm.
This year, the trustees are bringing another bill that will protect the plan from swings in
inflation or investment returns, and I hope you will support that also.
STEWARDSHIP OF STATE ASSETS
Sound management also involves the stewardship of tangible state assets. Regular
maintenance of state-owned facilities prevents larger problems in the future. But we also need
to constantly reevaluate our need for the facilities that we have. When I first ran for governor, I
talked about the need to scrutinize state-owned land and buildings and to sell assets that were
underutilized. This has been an ongoing process now for six years.
We first addressed the Human Services Center in Yankton, and with your support, we sold
unneeded land and demolished many vacant and dilapidated buildings. We also negotiated a
lease-purchase with the Yankton County Historical Society for the historic Mead Building. If you
haven’t seen it, this building is being beautifully restored.
Next, we looked at the campus of the South Dakota Developmental Center in Redfield. Like the
Yankton facility, this large campus was built to house over a thousand South Dakotans with
developmental or mental health issues, often for their entire lives. Today, the campus serves
only about 125 persons. This year, I will be asking you to authorize the transfer of several
vacant buildings and the adjoining lands from that campus to the city of Redfield, which has
expressed an interest in refurbishing the buildings and returning them to a public use.
5
We are also discussing a potential sale of the former State Training School campus in
Plankinton. This property has been leased for over a decade to a private company that
operates the Aurora Plains Academy there. We are considering the potential to sell the
campus, and I will be asking you to authorize that potential sale as well.
I am also asking you to approve the potential sale of the STAR Academy property, outside of
Custer, which closed last March. There are too few juveniles in the corrections system to justify
this large campus. Even a future increase of juveniles in corrections would not justify reopening
STAR Academy – we would use smaller, more efficient facilities closer to population centers.
My hope is that the STAR Academy property, which is at a scenic Black Hills location, can be
sold and developed to create jobs and economic activity in the area.
The construction of the new State Veterans Home in Hot Springs has also led us to reevaluate
the land and buildings, and I will be asking you to approve legislation that allows us to explore
repurposing portions of that campus.
Likewise, a building formerly used by Western Dakota Tech in Rapid City will be reverting to
state ownership. The state has no use for this building, and I will be asking you to authorize its
sale as well. I also hope to continue to discuss with the Board of Regents the former School for
the Deaf buildings and property, located on East 10th Street in Sioux Falls.
We owe it to taxpayers to keep the state’s footprint to a minimum, to avoid spending tax
dollars on maintenance of unneeded facilities and to return these properties to the tax rolls
when possible.
INFRASTRUCTURE
Of course state infrastructure is not confined to buildings. We also have transportation
infrastructure, and over the past six years, we have made great progress in this area as well.
We have refurbished two significant stretches of state-owned rail line. In 2014, you
appropriated $7.2 million in general funds to upgrade the state-owned line from Chamberlain
to Presho. We also provided grants from the Future Fund and the state rail fund and received a
federal TIGER grant. Because of this upgrade, Wheat Growers constructed a $50 million grain
handling facility in Kennebec, which was completed this fall.
In addition, we upgraded the Britton line, aided by a Future Fund grant and a loan from the
state rail fund. This line runs from Aberdeen into North Dakota and connects shippers to both
the Canadian Pacific Rail line and the Burlington Northern line. As a result of this upgrade, the
Wheaton-Dumont Elevator and United Grain Corporation built a $40 million dollar state-of-theart
facility on the Britton spur. That facility opened this fall and is shipping grain today. Both of
these upgrades have created more shipping and selling options for farmers, created jobs in
rural areas, and added significant grain handling facilities to the property tax rolls.
6
We are also making major investments in our highways. One example is Highway 100 in Sioux
Falls. A major phase of this multi-year project will let bids this summer to connect this new
urban corridor to I-90 west of Brandon. That phase of the project should be completed by
2019.
We have also provided aid to local government infrastructure. Two years ago, we created the
Bridge Improvement Grant Fund, which is now granting millions each year to reduce the
backlog of necessary repairs to local bridges.
As still another piece of state infrastructure, I spoke last month about the need to replace the
state Animal Disease Research and Diagnostic Laboratory at SDSU. Even in a lean budget year, I
am hopeful we can secure for the long-term our animal health laboratory, which protects our
citizens and our livestock industry.
BLUE RIBBON TASK FORCE
Beyond our tangible infrastructure, a critical duty of our state is to provide a system of K-12
education. To be effective, we need to recruit and retain good teachers, and we compete with
neighboring states to do that. Last year, we passed major legislation to increase teacher pay
and rewrite the school funding formula. We are already seeing success from those changes.
First, on teacher pay. As you know, when the Blue Ribbon Task Force met, our average teacher
salary was just over $40,000. Our new formula was designed and funded to afford an average
of $48,500. We knew we wouldn’t reach that average in one year, because schools need time
to become more efficient and repurpose their own funds into salaries. Still, according to the
preliminary school reports, our average salary this fall is $46,937 – just short of $47,000. The
state’s average salary increased by 11.9 percent.
Our smaller, rural districts are especially challenged to attract teachers, so I was particularly
pleased that preliminary data shows very sizable salary increases in many small districts. In
Jones County, the average teacher salary increased by 22 percent. In Ethan, it increased by
20 percent. In Mobridge-Pollock, salaries are up 25 percent; in Faith, up 18 percent; Iroquois,
up 23 percent; Florence, up 20 percent; Burke, up 19 percent; Oelrichs and Gayville-Volin both
up 21 percent, and the highest increase in South Dakota, as a percentage, was Waubay, whose
average is up 26.3 percent.
Larger schools also enjoyed sizable raises, although they had higher salaries to begin with, and
therefore, their percentage increases are generally lower.
I have already heard from many superintendents that these changes are having an impact.
Fewer teachers are departing, fewer vacancies are left unfilled, positions are getting more
applicants, and more teachers are staying in South Dakota rather than leaving the state.
I know some have expressed concern about the new formula’s impact on small schools,
because the new formula calculates state aid based on actual number of enrolled students. In 
7
other words, it no longer allows a school with declining enrollments to receive funding based
on the higher enrollments of past years.
Even with that change, however, the new formula was actually more favorable to small schools
than it was to larger ones. Statewide, schools received an average increase of $526 per
student. Large schools of over 600 students received only $507 more per student. Schools
between 200 and 600 students received $579 more per student, and schools of under
200 students did best of all – they received $653 more per student. Again, those numbers are
after the change to actual fall enrollments for calculating state aid.
K-12 EDUCATION
The state aid formula is not the only way that the state directly supports K-12 education. Our
successful Dual Credit program for high school students is now in its third year. As I’ve said
before, this dual credit program is a win-win-win. Students win because these are the cheapest
college credits they will ever buy, and they get a head start on college or tech school. High
schools win because they can expand their course offerings at no cost to the school district.
Universities and technical institutes win, because they attract students who are betterprepared
when they come to campus.
In the past school year, 2,139 high school students took at least one dual credit course from a
university, and another 899 took a technical institute course. The passage rate is excellent –
94 percent for university courses and 88 percent for technical institute courses. And the cost
savings are substantial. Last year, high school students and their families saved a total of
$4.4 million, compared to the tuition rate they would otherwise paid.
As you can tell, I’m very enthusiastic about the success of the dual credit program.
Unfortunately, the state offers another program to high schools that has not been so
successful, and I’d like to touch on that.
One persistent problem in South Dakota is the number of high school graduates who go on to
college but need remedial courses. Last year, 30 percent of first-year, full-time freshman at
state universities needed to take at least one remedial course in math or English. Unlike dual
credit, remedial courses are a lose-lose. Students lose because remedial courses are expensive,
and they don’t count for credit, so they set a student back in their college career. Universities
also lose, because students who need remediation are less likely to stay in school and graduate
on time.
To address this problem, four years ago, I proposed and the legislature funded the Accuplacer
assessment for high schools. This is a free service provided by the state to high schools. Here is
how it works: A high school junior with a poor ACT score takes the Accuplacer test in math and
English. The test identifies any area in which the student needs remediation. It might not be all
math – it might be just a specific concept. The student is then offered remedial coursework on
just that concept while the student is still in high school. If the student is able to pass the test
after taking the coursework, the state universities will not require the student to take a 
8
remedial course. It’s a great deal for these students – it saves them the cost of a college
remedial course, and avoids that delay when they get to college. And the state pays it, we pay
for the entire cost of every completed Accuplacer course.
Given that, I’m very frustrated that our high schools have been extremely slow to adopt this
free program. Last school year, only 154 Accuplacer assessments were taken, and only
100 final tests were taken statewide. Most students who needed this Accuplacer assessment
didn’t take it. And how do we know that? Because this past fall, at our state universities,
599 remedial courses were required for new freshmen from South Dakota high schools. That’s
599 remedial courses at about $1000 each, totaling over half a million dollars in expense.
Money our students paid, when the state has a free program not being used. We have
150 school districts in South Dakota, but 108 of them didn’t offer this to a single student.
Now in August, I spoke at the school administrator convention, and I asked them to take
advantage of this program, and I am hoping we’ll see much greater use this school year. I have
heard it suggested in the past that, if a high school graduate needs remediation in college, it
should be the high school, not the student, who pays the remediation bill. I’m not proposing
that today, but I certainly hope high schools will take advantage of the free courses we offer to
help their students avoid remediation.
On another front, the state is strengthening career and technical education programs. In 2016,
the Building South Dakota Fund awarded the first workforce education grants to help transform
high school CTE programs. Examples of initial grants include a new auto mechanic program at
Gayville-Volin, a precision ag program at Hitchcock-Tulare, and a nursing program in Mitchell.
HIGHER EDUCATION
At the technical institutes, the Build Dakota Scholarship is in its second year, and I am excited
about the results we’re seeing. As you know, this scholarship with launched with $25 million
from Denny Sanford and another $25 million in state Future Funds. Approximately
300 students each year receive full-ride scholarships to attend a technical institute in a highneed
program, promising to work in that field in South Dakota after they graduate.
Nationally, over the past two years, enrollment in two-year institutions is down nearly
17 percent. In South Dakota, we’ve bucked that trend; our statewide enrollment is down only
1 percent. In Build Dakota programs, though, enrollment is up nearly 10 percent. I’m excited
about the impact these Build Dakota scholarships will have on our workforce when the first
recipients receive their two-year degrees in May.
Voters showed their support for our technical institutes in the general election by passing
Amendment R. This amendment solved a longstanding constitutional problem by giving the
legislature authority to provide for the oversight of the technical institutes, and I will support
legislation this year that implements Amendment R.
9
Of course, we are also very proud of our six state universities who do so much to prepare our
young people to enter the workforce. I am particularly pleased that the Regents has taken a
leadership role in adopting a goal that 65 percent of South Dakota high school graduates go on
to graduate from a university or technical school. Most jobs of the future will require a posthigh
school credential, and we need to encourage students to obtain one.
We especially need health care workers, particularly in rural areas, and we continue to pursue
programs to address that need. The Recruitment Assistance Program helps communities
recruit primary care doctors, dentists, physician assistants, and nurse practitioners. Fifty-eight
percent of physicians and dentists, and 88 percent of physician assistants and nurse
practitioners remain at their small-town site even after completing their contract commitment.
Likewise, each year we place in rural communities 60 other health professionals, including
dietitians, nurses, pharmacists, and physical therapists.
We also launched the Frontier and Rural Medicine program to give third-year medical students
nine months of clinical training in rural communities. The first such students graduated from
med school last May, and five of them moved into a family practice residency program.
CRIMINAL JUSTICE
I’d like to take a little time now to talk about criminal justice. In 2012, we began to confront
South Dakota’s incarceration rate, which was much higher than our neighboring states’. I
joined with the Chief Justice, legislative leaders, and key stakeholders to propose the Public
Safety Improvement Act, which you passed overwhelmingly in 2013. The goals of this
legislation are to improve public safety, hold offenders more accountable, and direct state
dollars to the most dangerous offenders.
This act differentiated our drug laws so that major offenses would be treated more harshly than
minor offenses. It created and expanded alternative sentencing options, such as drug and DUI
courts, and HOPE probation. And it made the largest investment in the history of our state in
behavioral health services.
We knew these were major changes, and that’s why the Act also created an oversight council to
monitor progress, identify problems, and recommend changes. Reforms need time to work,
but we shouldn’t be afraid to adjust as we learn more and as circumstances change.
Four years later, we are seeing many positive developments from the Public Safety
Improvement Act.
Among the successes is probation. Under the old system, we were supervising for multiple
years many probationers who never reoffended. We did this in spite of data which shows that
if a probationer is going to reoffend, it is very likely to be in the first year of probation. For that
reason, we now allow felony probationers to reduce their probation term by 30 days, each time
they complete 30 days of perfect behavior. This reform allows our probation officers to focus
their attention on supervising those probationers who need it – those who are not compliant. 
10
The Act also created a presumption of probation for many low-level, non-violent crimes. This
doesn’t tie the hands of a judge who wants to sentence an offender to prison. A judge can
override the presumption, nor does this compromise public safety. Last year less than one
percent of those on presumptive probation were sent to prison for committing a violent crime.
I am also very pleased with the success of the substance abuse treatment programs created
under the Act. Five-hundred-forty individuals have completed substance abuse treatment, and
our rate of successful completion is 11 percent higher than the national average. Because of
these reforms, more offenders are receiving the help they need through community-based
treatment.
The Act also initiated a very successful partnership with the Sisseton Wahpeton Oyate. We
placed a state-funded parole agent at Sisseton, which allows tribal members to return home for
parole and engages local service providers and tribal law enforcement in providing support for
the offenders to change, and the results are compelling. In the first two years of this program,
the percentage of tribal parolees being returned to prison for a violation has fallen from
57 percent to 28 percent – cut in half.
Again, these efforts help focus our attention on violent offenders who pose a threat to public.
Nonviolent offenders receive treatment and remain in their communities where they can work
to support themselves and their families.
METH EPIDEMIC
These are important accomplishments, but there is still work to be done. The total prison
population today is lower than it would have been without any reforms, but it is higher than we
predicted it would be when we passed the Public Safety Improvement Act.
Why is that? Well we believe it’s due to the increase in methamphetamine trafficking, which in
South Dakota and our neighboring states have experienced over the past eight years. Like our
neighbors, South Dakota is seeing a big increase in meth-related arrests and convictions. For
the most part, meth is no longer being a manufactured in home-grown laboratories. It is being
produced on an industrial scale and trafficked into South Dakota from outside our state.
This meth epidemic needs to be addressed, and we need to make adjustments to the Public
Safety Improvement Act because of it. Last year, I invited a group of judges and court officials,
law enforcement officers, prosecutors, defense attorneys, corrections officials, and legislators
to look into the meth problem and make recommendations.
That group issued recommendations toward three important goals: First, we need to stop
meth from coming into South Dakota. Second, we need to educate people, especially young
people, to prevent use of meth. Third, we need to help those addicted to stop using meth. It is
in everyone’s interest to help them beat this addiction.
11
Based on that report, I am joining with the attorney general to propose a joint drug interdiction
task force, comprised of four new Highway Patrol officers, joined by designated agents of the
Division of Criminal Investigation. We will also be asking you to update the state’s outdated
wiretapping statute to include cellular phones. There is a very close correlation between the
increase in drug trafficking and the increase in meth arrests and convictions in South Dakota.
We need to stop meth from coming into South Dakota.
The Attorney General and the Department of Social Services are also both focused on educating
young people about meth, and a legislative interim committee also considered this issue last
year. Starting this year, the managers of state anti-meth programs will meet regularly to
coordinate these efforts and maximize their impact. We need to convince our citizens, again
especially our youth, to stay away from meth.
Finally, I’m proposing changes to the Public Safety Improvement Act to encourage treatment
and more directly confront the meth problem. For those who are on probation or parole, I am
proposing measures to reinforce good behavior and punish bad behavior. We will establish a
short mandatory sanction of required confinement for anyone on probation or parole who fails
a drug test. This will guarantee swift and certain sanctions for offenders who choose to use
drugs. Conversely, we will allow supervision to be terminated early for parolees and
probationers who stay clean, complete treatment, and don’t violate the terms of their
supervision for at least one year.
To help those who are already addicted to meth, I am proposing we incentivize effective
completion of treatment. Offenders who complete all court-ordered treatment within one year
will be given one opportunity to reduce a drug possession or ingestion charge from a felony to a
Class 1 misdemeanor. This option would only be available once for each offender.
I am also recommending grants to expand HOPE 24/7 Probation to all counties. HOPE 24/7 is
similar to the successful 24/7 program for alcohol offenders. HOPE 24/7 has been implemented
in ten counties and provides intensive probation and treatment for serious drug offenders, who
are required to take random drug tests to ensure that they stay clean.
These steps I believe will strengthen the state’s response to the meth epidemic, while helping
meth users beat their addiction. Meth is an extremely addictive drug that ruins homes and
destroys lives. Trying meth just once can lead to death, and it changes brain functions. Meth
users experience paranoia, delusions, severe tooth decay, and skin sores. The reforms I
described have the potential to help those users and end the vicious cycle of drug abuse within
families.
JUVENILE JUSTICE
Two years ago, we recognized that South Dakota was locking up juveniles at the 2nd highest rate
in the nation. Most were nonviolent. You joined me in passing reforms to the juvenile justice
system. The statutory purpose of our juvenile justice system is rehabilitation, and locking up 
12
youth has been shown to make them more likely to commit crimes as adults. We need to avoid
locking up young people unless they are a danger to others.
The reforms invested $6.1 million in expanded community-based treatment. Functional family
therapy focuses on the family, as well as the young person, to address underlying family issues
that often cause delinquency. More than 50 trained treatment clinicians travel to the home
and provide treatment in rural areas, not just in larger towns. Last year, nearly 700 young
people were served through this treatment, including 250 who were referred from outside of
the criminal justice system.
Fewer young offenders who needed to be housed in an institution led to the closure last year of
STAR Academy, as I mentioned earlier. Instead, we are making greater use of our communitybased
facilities and providers and focusing more on rehabilitation.
One aspect of the reforms that has been troublesome is the issue of truancy. We all know that
keeping young people in school is vital to their long-term success. The reform legislation
changed the truancy statute to allow schools to intervene with a citation earlier in the process.
But some schools and counties felt that the new law made it difficult for them to deal with
these issues.
The Juvenile Justice Oversight Council sought input from schools and will be proposing
legislation this year to give state’s attorneys greater flexibility in handling truancy cases. I
support that change, and as I said a moment ago, we need to adjust as we learn more.
MENTAL HEALTH TASK FORCE
This past year, Chief Justice Gilbertson convened a task force to address issues in the criminal
justice system relating to mental health. Court orders for competency evaluations had tripled
in recent years, contributing to the backlog of evaluations and causing higher costs. In some
cases, mentally ill individuals had to wait in jail several months for their competency
evaluations to be completed. That’s not fair to the individual, and it creates an unnecessary jail
expense for the county.
Funded by a grant from the Helmsley Charitable Trust, the task force released its report in
November. Among its findings, it recognized that our system lacks procedures to identify
mental illness quickly after an arrest, and in many cases, jails are not equipped to deal with
mental health needs. In some cases, diversion options that are already authorized by statute
are not available in all areas of the state.
I will be supporting the task force’s recommendations, which takes a multi-faceted approach to
these problems.
The legislation will provide law enforcement with tools to better identify and respond to mental
health crises and prevent unnecessary jail admissions and to assist communities in building
capacity to offer crisis intervention services. The bill will also expand the pool of providers who 
13
can provide competency evaluations and will shift funding from the Human Services Center
directly to counties to perform these evaluations. Much like our adult and juvenile reform
patterns, an oversight council will monitor implementation and recommend changes to future
legislatures.
I thank the Chief Justice and task force members for studying this difficult issue and for offering
common sense proposals to improve our system. I also thank the Helmsley Charitable Trust for
its financial support.
TRIBAL RELATIONS
Last year, Chairman Harold Frazier of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe gave the first-ever State of
the Tribes Address in this chamber. It gave this body and South Dakotans a chance to hear
about the challenges facing Indian Country from the perspective of an elected tribal leader.
I look forward to Thursday’s 2017 State of the Tribes Address from Chairman Robert Flying
Hawk of the Yankton Sioux Tribe, and I hope this continues as an annual tradition.
Relations between the tribes and the state made continued progress in 2016, thanks in large
part to the efforts of Tribal Relations Secretary Steve Emery and his staff. I mentioned a few
moments ago the successful parole agreement we have undertaken with the Sisseton
Wahpeton Oyate. Let me give you a few more examples.
Last year, the state reached new tax collection agreements with the Crow Creek Sioux, Oglala
Sioux, and Sisseton-Wahpeton tribes, and we are in discussions with the Lower Brule Sioux.
These agreements generate tax revenue for the tribes and promote uniformity and fairness in
taxation. If discussions with the Lower Brule are successful, we will have agreements with all
nine tribes, for the first time in South Dakota history.
We also extended or signed tribal gaming compacts last year with the Crow Creek Sioux,
Flandreau Santee Sioux, Rosebud Sioux, and Yankton Sioux tribes. In some renegotiated
compacts, tribes have committed financial assistance to local governments. This, too, is
something new, a welcome addition for several counties.
Game, Fish, and Parks has partnered with tribal governments to improve management and
conservation of shared natural resources. Game, Fish, and Parks has hosted training sessions
for tribal conservation staff, aided with establishing deer and elk food plots, and provided
equipment and staff for outdoor events. This year, GFP signed memorandums of
understanding to formalize cooperation with the Rosebud Sioux and the Lower Brule Sioux
tribes.
In the education realm, the Department of Education is working with the Commission for Oceti
Sakowin Accreditation to allow the Commission to accredit non-public tribal schools. The
Commission is nine tribe collaboration focused on ensuring cultural relevance in tribal schools.
On September 17, we celebrated the dedication of a new South Dakota landmark – “Dignity.”
14
Located near Chamberlain at the rest area on Interstate 90, Dignity is a 45-foot tall stainless
steel sculpture of a Native American woman receiving a star quilt. It was created by South
Dakota Artist Laureate Dale Lamphere. Norm and Eunabel McKie of Rapid City donated the
sculpture as a gift to honor the heritage of our Native people.
National headlines often emphasize our divisions. But seeing Dignity and recounting the
progress made in tribal-state relations this year reminds us that, in South Dakota, we have
more in common than we sometimes realize. The important thing, even where we may differ,
is to treat each other with dignity.
LONG TERM CARE
This week, I will sign an executive order for your consideration to reorganize long term care
services within state government, by creating a Division of Long Term Services and Supports
within the Department of Human Services.
The purpose of the reorganization is to create a more integrated approach to the delivery of
long term care in South Dakota and to ensure that people get the services they need in their
communities. Our state will experience demographic changes in the coming years, which will
require more long term services and supports. In 2035, it’s estimated the number of elders will
increase in South Dakota by 84 percent, compared to 2010. Hopefully, I will still be around, and
among them! The number of elders with disabilities is expected to be 71 percent higher.
Today, the Department of Human Services assists those with developmental disabilities who
require long term care, and the Department of Social Services provides that same assistance to
those who are aging. We have two different departments providing a very similar service.
Combining these services in one department will ensure that people can access long term care,
regardless of why they need it. The reorganized agency will also redouble efforts to develop
community based services in our state to provide care, in homes, or other environments less
restrictive, and less expensive than nursing home placements.
BALLOT MEASURES
Last month in the budget address, I spoke about Initiated Measure 22. Since then, that law has
been enjoined due to numerous constitutional problems. Given that, I will support efforts this
session to repeal Initiated Measure 22 and replace it with provisions that are well-crafted,
constitutional, and responsive to the voters. The voters expect our campaign finance system to
be transparent and honest, and they expect lobbyists to use only their arguments to win our
votes.
The proliferation of complex measures crowding our ballots through the efforts of people who
don’t live in South Dakota is a concern to many. We need to find a way to stop out-of-state
organizations from experimenting with South Dakota’s constitution and laws. These groups
have no ties to our state and often don’t even disclose the source of their funds. They are using
our state’s low signature requirement and cheap media markets to attempt to pass 
15
constitutional amendments and initiated measures that advance their national agendas but
don’t address problems seen in South Dakota.
It's ironic. South Dakota was the first state in the nation to create the initiative and
referendum. In 1898, voters adopted these features of our constitution because of a fear that
big money, out-of-state special interests would take over the state legislature. Now, 120 years
later, we find big out-of-state money is taking over our ballot. They use the initiative process –
the very process we created to protect ourselves from them.
This session, we need to work together to find a way to protect our state from interference by
out-of-state groups, while preserving our citizens’ access to direct democracy, so issues that do
concern our grassroots can be raised, but not by people who don’t even live here.
RIPARIAN BUFFER STRIPS
Speaking of another kind of grassroots, I am introducing a bill this year to provide property tax
incentives for riparian buffer strips on agricultural property. These buffer strips are areas near
streams or lakes that have perennial plantings to protect the water from adjoining land uses.
They improve water quality by filtering sediment and surface contaminants from runoff.
Last year, you overwhelmingly passed a similar bill that I vetoed because of constitutional
concerns, and I believe the new bill overcomes these concerns, and the legislation I am
proposing has received positive support from ag groups, local governments, conservationists,
sportsmen, and the Ag Land Assessment Task Force. I hope you will support it as well.
STATE PARKS
Another important way that our state preserves our outdoors is through our excellent state
park system. In 2016, more people camped in South Dakota’s state parks than ever before.
Our parks hosted over 329,000 nights of camping – up 4 percent from 2015, when the
75th Sturgis Rally and the 50th Buffalo Roundup were held. Camping numbers have been
increasing for our state parks every year for more than a decade.
Progress continues at Good Earth State Park, which you approved in 2013 as South Dakota’s
thirteenth state park. Construction of the new visitor center is progressing, and the
surrounding sidewalks are nearing completion. The new roadway into the park and parking
area are complete. The visitor center film and interpretive displays, which will tell the story of
the site’s native inhabitants, are also underway. Outside native grasses have been sown, trees
planted, and hiking trails developed. A grand opening of the visitor center is scheduled for
May.
We also continue to pursue efforts to create a state park in Spearfish Canyon. I spoke to you
about this last year. Our congressional delegation has introduced legislation that authorizes the
exchange of 1,992 acres of Black Hills National Forest Land for 1,954 acres of state land,
currently held by School and Public Lands, and 34 acres within Spearfish Canyon. 
16
The exchange is a good deal for South Dakota. It gives the state control of a beautiful area
while allowing the federal government to round out some of its grasslands holdings. It also will
increase annual earnings from the School and Public Lands fund to benefit our K-12 schools.
I know there is some concern in the Spearfish area about the long-term plans for this site.
Game, Fish, and Parks has been meeting with local groups to discuss next steps and will be
holding public information meetings to gather feedback and continue the discussion. We want
public input before any final decisions are made about management of the lands, including
potential fee areas or infrastructure improvements.
SANFORD UNDERGROUND RESEARCH FACILITY
Just down the road from Spearfish Canyon is another significant state investment, the Sanford
Underground Research Facility at the former Homestake Gold Mine. Progress continues at the
lab on the Deep Underground Neutrino Experiment, or DUNE. This experiment will fire a beam
of neutrinos – tiny subatomic particles – from Fermilab, just outside Chicago, through the Earth
to huge underground detectors at the Sanford Lab.
Thirty countries and 161 institutions are now involved with DUNE. Rehabilitation of the Ross
Shaft, which is necessary to move equipment down into the lab, is 85 percent complete and on
track to be finished in September. Last year, the project received federal approval for early
construction. In 2017, the lab will begin building a conveyor system to remove rock as massive
detector chambers are created underground, beginning in 2019. Although funding for this
project is always contingent on the federal budget, our state’s investment in the facility, as well
as the continued support of our congressional delegation, have put us in an unprecedented
position to succeed.
SOUTH DAKOTA NATIONAL GUARD
Before I close today, I want to give tribute to something of which we can all be proud – the role
the National Guard plays in defending our nation and responding to emergencies here at home.
Sometimes they are recognized at the national level, and we don’t fully appreciate it here back
at home.
Since 9/11, the South Dakotan National Guard has deployed more than 7,800 soldiers and
airmen. In 2016, more than 370 soldiers from five South Dakota units supported overseas
contingency operations. The 155th Engineer Company, 196th Maneuver Enhancement Brigade,
153rd Engineer Battalion, 114th Fighter Wing, and Detachment 48 all served abroad last year in
Afghanistan, Kuwait, and Poland.
The soldiers and airmen of the South Dakota National Guard have been recognized time and
time again for their excellence. Our National Guard ranks number one in the nation for
attrition loss rate, number two in security compliance, number three for timeliness in soldier
evaluations, and number five for personnel readiness and soldier management. The South
Dakota Army National Guard was presented with a first-place gold finish in the 2016 Army
Communities of Excellence Awards, and for the third consecutive year, the 153rd Engineer 
17
Battalion was awarded the top overall battalion-sized unit in the nation and winner of the
Reckord Trophy. In 2016, the 114th Fighter Wing, likewise, for the third year in a row, was
designated a Distinguished Flying Unit as one of the five best flying units in the nation.
We have good reason to be proud of our soldiers and airmen. Please join me in a round of
applause to thank them for their efforts.
MEDICAID AND INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
Next week, Donald Trump will be sworn in as the 45th President of the United States. Many of
us were bracing ourselves for four more years of the status quo in Washington DC, and I look
forward to an administration that respects limited government, is committed to reining in the
federal bureaucracy, and understands the role of the states in a federal system.
Both the Trump Administration and leaders in Congress have been reaching out to the states
asking for ways to roll back regulation and return flexibility to the states. In my responses, my
priority is Medicaid reform. Last year, I explained how funding for Medicaid works for Native
Americans who are also eligible for services from the Indian Health Service. When a person
who is on Medicaid and eligible for Indian Health Services gets their health care from Indian
Health Services, the federal government covers 100 percent of the cost. But when that same
person who is Medicaid eligible and Indian Health Services eligible can’t get care from Indian
Health Services – maybe they don’t live close to an Indian Health Services facility or perhaps
Indian Health Services can’t provide the type of specialty care the person needs – in that case
the federal government covers only about half of the bill – not 100 percent. State taxpayers
cover the other half. This cost the state budget almost $93 million last year.
The federal government needs to live up to its obligation to provide health care for Native
Americans and pay for it no matter where services are provided. We saw a federal policy
change last year that moved in that direction, but it didn’t go far enough. It requires non-IHS
and other healthcare providers to jump through several hoops, and without Medicaid
expansion there is no way to get them to do that.
The good news is that the Trump Administration and the Republican Congress are both
interested in reforming Medicaid to correct longstanding issues with the program. I have met
with our congressional delegation to discuss this, and I will be in Washington to discuss
Medicaid reform with the Senate Committee next week again.
There is also a strong possibility that Medicaid reform efforts could change Medicaid to a per
capita or block grant allocation, and I will advocate for an equitable federal allocation to the
state and for the IHS funding issue to be resolved. I will also ask for more flexibility in the
Medicaid program. If states are going to be asked to assume more of the risk, we should also
be given more flexibility to innovate and find ways to control costs and improve care.
18
AGRICULTURE
In closing today, I want to say a few words to the ag community. It’s been a tough couple of
years with depressed crop prices and low livestock prices, the immediate outlook for
agriculture doesn’t look very rosy. The state is seeing that reality through slow sales tax
growth, but our farmers and ranchers feel the impact every day.
I remember in high school when our family farm went upside-down financially. We had to
auction all our livestock and equipment. It was a hard day for my parents who took jobs as
janitors at Augustana College to make ends meet. Farmers and ranchers are repeatedly faced
with difficulty, but our ag sector has survived and prospered for more than a hundred years
despite the risks and despite bad circumstances.
And we have reason for continued hope. South Dakota’s farm and ranch families are resilient.
They work hard and they are dedicated. When times are tough, they get tougher. They persist
and get up every day to put food on their tables and ours.
We saw that last summer, that same persistence following the Cottonwood Fire. After the loss
of 285 head of cattle and 250 miles of fence line, we saw neighbor helping neighbor. When
disaster hit, the community truly rallied around the families affected. Neighbors pitched in to
ensure those who lost pasture and hay had feed for their livestock. Groups organized “fencing
parties” to start the daunting task of repairing and replacing the miles of damaged or destroyed
fence. People from around the state donated fencing materials and hay. $125,000 was raised
to help families impacted by the fire.
Whether it’s a flood, blizzard, fire, or windstorm, South Dakotans always pull together when
disaster strikes. Over Labor Day weekend, Springfield was hit by a severe storm with straight
line winds of over 100 mph. The storm destroyed six homes and damaged a number of others.
According to early news reports, 70 people were displaced by the storm. The county
emergency manager called the state Department of Public Safety to say the town might need
state crews to assist with the response.
What followed wasn’t surprising. Of the seventy people without a place to stay, only two used
the Red Cross shelter. The rest found refuge with relatives and friends. And then the
emergency manager called us back. They didn’t need the state crews after all, because more
than 500 volunteers appeared to assist the community in cleanup efforts.
On Christmas Day, when our state was hit with a severe winter storm and many lost power,
South Dakotans came together yet again. One man from the northeast part of the state
volunteered his own generator to power the homes of several others. He kept the generator
fueled and checked on his neighbors the entire week. Another man, one of Whetstone's
electricians, learned of an elderly woman using a wood burning stove and found a neighbor to
help carry wood and check in on her. Residents made hot meals for line crews. A line crew
foreman in Enning was snowed in at his house by a 15-foot drift in front of his door. He climbed
out of his bedroom window so he could get to work restoring power. 
19
These stories demonstrate why South Dakota is such a great place to live. When disaster
strikes, we don’t wait for the government to arrive; we get to work, help ourselves, and help
our neighbors too.
We have much to be proud of in South Dakota. Our outstanding business climate, low tax
burden, clean air, beautiful scenery, safe communities; they all set us apart, and more people
are discovering our high quality of life. Just last week, in fact, a report by United Van Lines
found South Dakota with the highest rate of inbound moves in the country. We have much to
be proud of in South Dakota.
But, you know, as much as I’m proud of South Dakota, I’m most proud of South Dakotans. Your
character and determination give me great confidence in our future. I’m very lucky to be
Governor of this place, and I do believe our best days are yet ahead. Thank you so much.